The Project Gutenberg EBook of Delco Manuals: Radio Model 633, Delcotron
Generator, by Delco-Remy Division

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Delco Manuals: Radio Model 633, Delcotron Generator
       Delco Radio Owner's Manual Model 633, Delcotron Generator Installation

Author: Delco-Remy Division

Release Date: February 26, 2010 [EBook #31407]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DELCO MANUALS ***




Produced by Gerard Arthus, Meredith Bach, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






 [Transcriber's Note: This ebook contains two manuals by Delco: Delco Radio
  Owner's Manual Model 633 and Delcotron Generator Installation. They are
  separated by a divider.

  In the list on pages 10 and 11 of Delco Radio Owner's Manual Model 633,
  the second station line for Tulsa (which is CFRB 690) has been removed,
  as it is believed to be an accidental reprinting of the following station
  line. Redundant headers and (foot)notes on these pages have also been
  removed.]




 DELCO RADIO
 OWNER'S MANUAL

 MODEL 633




INSTALLATION AND OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS


This model of the Delco Radio is a six-tube super-heterodyne receiver
designed for operation with a HEADER type speaker. It comprises the best
in automotive radio engineering, featuring Syncro-Tuning--the newest,
most efficient antenna circuit yet developed, and Sensitivity Control.

The speaker and remote control unit are supplied in separate packages
and are available in a wide variety of types and styles, depending upon
the make and model of car the unit is to be used on.

The package contains:


                                                            _Part No._

 1 Receiver Unit, complete with tubes

 1 Speaker Unit (less Adapter)                                 1210934

 1 Combined Drilling Template and Radio--Dash Spacer

 2 Chassis Mounting studs, 1/4--20 x 2-1/2                     1207562

 2 Chassis Mounting Shakeproof Washers                         1208565

 2 Chassis Mounting Nuts, 1/4--20                               120375

 1 Antenna Lead                                                1209622

 1 Distributor Suppressor                                      1207818

 1 Generator Condenser                                         1849014

 1 Ammeter Condenser                                           1209333




INSTALLATION


=Antenna--=

See Instructions in antenna package.


=Chassis--=

This receiver may be installed on any car with Positive or Negative
ground without any changes of wiring.

When possible, locate the chassis on the driver's side of the dash, over
the steering column, with the removable cover plate facing the floor.
This position places the control shafts on the end of the case facing
the center of the car.

Locate the position of the mounting holes by means of the template
included in the package. Drill the holes, using a 3/8" drill, and scrape
the paint from around the holes on the engine side of the dash to insure
a good ground connection as there is no other ground connection for this
receiver.

Make sure that all tubes and the vibrator are pushed well down in their
sockets and that all the grid clips are properly in place on the top
caps of their respective tubes.

If a six-volt storage battery is available, check the receiver for
normal operation before permanently installing it on the car. The
antenna lead and control unit may be temporarily connected for this
test.

Insert the two receiver mounting studs in the back of the receiver case
with the "burred" threads nearest the receiver to make sure that these
studs do not enter the case far enough to cause damage to the receiver
parts.

Install the receiver, using the drilling template as a spacer between
the dash and the receiver case. Install the two shakeproof washers over
the chassis mounting studs. Then tighten the mounting nuts to insure
that the receiver case shall be thoroughly grounded to the dash.


=Antenna Lead--=

Attach the black antenna lead to the car antenna and plug the connector
on the antenna lead into the receiver chassis as shown in the
Installation Diagrams. Ground the pigtail of the antenna lead shield to
a convenient body bolt. Keep antenna lead out of engine compartment to
avoid possibility of ignition interference being picked up by the
lead-in.


=Speaker--=

See Instructions in speaker package.


=Remote Control Unit--=

See Instructions in remote control package.


CONTROL UNIT ADJUSTMENT

The volume control and station selector shafts are AUTOMATICALLY
adjusted as follows:

1. Insert control cables in their respective bushings on the case
(volume control is upper bushing when receiver is installed in the car),
until they seat themselves and then tighten the set screws.

2. Turn the station selector knob to the right (clockwise) until it
stops--then turn the knob counter-clockwise until it stops. The dial is
now logged.

3. Turn the volume control knob clockwise until the knob turns hard. The
volume control is now on full.


=Eliminating Motor Interference--=

Connect the ammeter condenser to the spring clip at the end of the wire
containing the fuse holder by means of the self-threading screw on the
side of the spring clip. Ground the other terminal of the condenser at
any convenient point.

Install the generator condenser on the generator side of the generator
cut-out as shown in the Diagram of Connections. DO NOT connect the
flexible lead to the field terminal of the generator.

Remove the center distributor lead and insert the distributor suppressor
in its place. Then plug the distributor lead into the suppressor.


=Adjusting Delco Syncro-Tuning--=

Turn the receiver on.

Tune-in a radio station which logs between 55 and 65 on the dial and
gives the radio a signal BARELY AUDIBLE in the speaker WITH the VOLUME
control FULL ON. A small snap button cap is located in the end of the
receiver case beside the antenna lead connection. Remove the snap button
cap by prying with a small screw driver.

By means of a small screw driver inserted in the hole which was covered
by the small cap, adjust the Delco Syncro-Tuning condenser unit for
maximum output in the speaker. Remaining on same station, readjust
station selector for maximum volume and readjust the Delco Syncro-Tuning
Condenser unit for maximum output. No further adjustment of this unit
will be necessary as the receiver is now adjusted for best operation
with your car antenna. Replace the snap button cap.




OPERATION


=To Turn On Receiver--=

Some control units have a small knob located below the center of the
dial. If your receiver is equipped with this type of control push this
small knob in as far as it will go. Other control units have a
combination on-off switch and volume control knob. To turn on this type
of control turn the knob clockwise until the switch clicks and the dial
is illuminated.


=Volume Control--=

Turning the volume control knob toward the right increases the output of
the receiver and turning it toward the left reduces the output.


=How To Tune The Receiver--=

Turn the volume control knob approximately half way to the right. Rotate
the station selector knob slowly until a station is heard. Tune this
station in until the minimum amount of background noise is heard.
Increase or decrease the volume to the desired level by adjusting the
volume control knob. Careful tuning will result in better tone quality
from all stations.

If the program being received is from a powerful local station local
interference may be practically eliminated by turning the sensitivity
control to the LOCAL position. You then will get the best possible
reproduction of that station's program.


[Illustration: =INSTALLATION DIAGRAMS=

GROUND TO DASH

CASE SPACER AND DRILLING TEMPLATE

DASH

AMMETER CLIP

AMMETER CONDENSER NO. 1209333

ANTENNA LEAD (BLACK)

VOLUME CONTROL BUSHING

FUSE

TO COIL

REMOVE SNAP BUTTON CAP TO ADJUST ANTENNA COMPENSATING CONDENSER

STATION SELECTOR BUSHING

DISTRIBUTOR SUPPRESSOR NO. 1207818

GROUND TO CAR

POWER LEAD

SENSITIVITY CONTROL

TONE CONTROL

ARMATURE TERMINAL

DO NOT CONNECT TO FIELD TERMINAL

VOLUME CONTROL

STATION SELECTOR

GENERATOR CONDENSER 1849014

SUGGESTED GENERATOR CONDENSER CONNECTIONS

ON-OFF SWITCH]


=Sensitivity Control--=

The sensitivity control is located on the lower, left front corner of
the receiver case and when turned to the LOCAL position it decreases the
sensitivity of the receiver sufficiently to greatly reduce interference
from street cars, electric signs, X-Ray machines, electrical machinery,
power lines, etc. It will also eliminate interference from weak
stations.

When the control is turned to the DISTANCE position the receiver is
allowed to operate at maximum sensitivity.


=Tone Control--=

The tone control is located on the lower, right front corner of the
receiver case. This control is to be adjusted at the operator's will.
However, most experienced operators prefer to set it for maximum treble
response when the car is operated at high speeds.


=To Turn Off The Receiver--=

If the control head has a key knob in the center pull the knob out until
it clicks into the off position and the receiver ceases to operate. If
you wish to lock the receiver, pull the knob all the way out of the
control unit and carry it with you.

If you are using the type of control unit which has a combination on-off
switch and volume control knob turn the knob to the left until the
receiver ceases to operate.




SERVICE


Should your receiver fail to operate, first check the fuse located in
the fuse holder in the ammeter cable. If you wish to remove your tubes
and vibrator for test purposes, their location is indicated below.

[Illustration: _Tube Complement_

2 Type 6D6
1 Type 6A7
1 Type 6B7
1 Type 6B5
1 Type 84]

Any further service work on your receiver should be referred to a
competent radio service station.

When at home call your local

 DEALER.................................

 AT.....................................

 TELEPHONE..............................

 DATE RADIO INSTALLED...................




PRINCIPAL BROADCAST STATIONS[A]

ARRANGED ALPHABETICALLY BY CITIES


 =Abilene, Kans.=
   KFBI                1050

 =Albuquerque, N. M.=
   KOB                 1180

 =Alexandria, Va.=
   WJSV                1460

 =Amarillo, Tex.=
   KGRS                1410
   WDAG                1410

 =Ames, Iowa=
   WOI                  640

 =Asheville, N. C.=
   WWNC                 570

 =Atlanta, Ga.=
   WSB                  740

 =Atlantic City, N. J.=
   WPG                 1100

 =Baltimore, Md.=
   WBAL                1060

 =Belle Plaine (Moose Jaw), Sask.=
   CJRM                 540

 =Billings, Mont.=
   KGHL                 950

 =Birmingham, Ala.=
   WAPI                1140

 =Bismarck, N. D.=
   KFYR                 550

 =Boise, Idaho=
   KIDO                1350

 =Boston, Mass.=
   WBZ                  990
   WBZA                 990
   WEEI                 590
   WHDH                 830
   WNAC                1230

 =Brookings, S. D.=
   KFDY                 550

 =Brooklyn, N. Y.=
   WBBR                1300

 =Buffalo, N. Y.=
   WBEN                 900
   WGR                  550
   WKWB                1480

 =Chattanooga, Tenn.=
   WDOD               1280

 =Chicago, Ill.=
   WBBM                770
   WCFL                970
   WENR                870
   WGN                 720
   WJJD               1130
   WLS                 870
   WMAQ                670
   WMBI               1080
   KYW                1020

 =Charlotte, N. C.=
   WBT                1080

 =Cincinnati, Ohio=
   WLW                 700

 =Clay Center, Nebr.=
   KMMJ                740

 =Cleveland, Ohio=
   WHK                1390
   WTAM               1070

 =Colorado Springs, Col.=
   KVOR               1270

 =Council Bluffs, Ia.=
   KOIL               1260

 =Covington, Ky.=
   WCKY               1490

 =Dallas, Tex.=
   KRLD               1040
   WFAA                800

 =Denver, Colo.=
   KLZ                 560
   KOA                 830

 =Des Moines, Ia.=
   WOC                1000

 =Detroit, Mich.=
   WWJ                 920
   WJR                 750
   WXYZ               1240

 =Eau Claire, Wis.=
   WTAQ               1330

 =Edmonton, Alta.=
   CJCA                730

 =Elmira, N. Y.=
   WESG               1040

 =Fargo, N. D.=
   WDAY                940

 =Fayetteville, Ark.=
   KUOA               1260

 =Fort Wayne, Ind.=
   WOWO               1160

 =Fort Worth, Tex.=
   KTAT               1240
   WBAP                800

 =Gainesville, Fla.=
   WRUF                830

 =Gary, Ind.=
   WIND                560

 =Great Falls, Mont.=
   KFBB               1280

 =Harrisburg, Pa.=
   WBAK              1430

 =Hartford, Conn.=
   WDRC              1330
   WTIC              1060

 =Havana, Cuba=
   CMCQ               780
   CMK                730
   CMW                590
   CMX                890

 =Hollywood, Cal.=
   KFWB               950

 =Honolulu, Hawaii=
   KGU                750

 =Hot Springs National Park, Ark.=
   KTHS              1040

 =Houston, Tex.=
   KPRC               920

 =Indianapolis, Ind.=
   WFBM              1230

 =Jackson, Miss.=
   WJDX              1270

 =Jacksonville, Fla.=
   WJAX               900

 =Kalamazoo, Mich.=
   WKZO               590

 =Kansas City, Mo.=
   KMBC               950
   WDAF               610
   WOQ                1300

 =Knoxville, Tenn.=
   WNOX                560

 =La Crosse, Wis.=
   WKBH               1380

 =La Prairie (Montreal), Que.=
   CRCM                910

 =Lawrence, Kans.=
   WREN               1220

 =Lansing, Mich.=
   WKAR               1040

 =Lincoln, Nebr.=
   KFAB                770

 =Little Rock, Ark.=
   KLRA               1390

 =Long Beach, Cal.=
   KFOX               1250
   KGER               1360

 =Los Angeles, Cal.=
   KECA               1430
   KFAC               1300
   KFI                 640
   KHJ                 900
   KNX                1050

 =Louisville, Ky.=
   WAVE                940
   WHAS                820

 =Lulu Island (Vancouver Island), B. C.=
   CRCV               1100

 =Madison, Wis.=
   WHA                 940

 =Mexico City, Mexico=
   XEB                1030
   XEN                 711
   XEW                 910
   XFG                 638
   XFI                 818
   XEFO                940
   XETR                610

 =Miami Beach, Fla.=
   WMBF               1300

 =Miami, Fla.=
   WIOD               1300
   WQAM                560

 =Milwaukee, Wis.=
   WTMJ                620

 =Minneapolis, Minn.=
   WCCO                810
   WDGY               1180
   WLB                1250
   WRHM               1250

 =Montreal, Que.=
   CKAC                730

 =Nashville, Tenn.=
   WLAC               1470
   WSM                 650

 =Newark, N. J.=
   WAAM               1250
   WNEW               1250
   WOR                 710

 =New Orleans, La.=
   WDSU               1250
   WWL                 850

 =New York, N. Y.=
   WABC                860
   WEAF                660
   WFAB               1300
   WJZ                 760
   WLWL               1100
   WOV                1130

 =Norfolk, Nebr.=
   WJAG               1060

 =Northfield, Minn.=
   WCAL               1250

 =Oakland, Cal.=
   KLX                 880

 =Oklahoma, Okla.=
   WKY                 900
   KOMA               1480

 =Omaha, Nebr.=
   WOW                 590

 =Ottawa, Ont.=
   CRCO                880

 =Philadelphia, Pa.=
   WCAU               1170

 =Piedras Negras, Coahuila=
   XEPN                585

 =Pittsburgh, Pa.=
   KDKA                980
   WCAE               1220
   WJAS               1290

 =Portland, Me.=
   WCSH                940

 =Portland, Ore.=
   KEX                1180
   KGW                 620
   KOIN                940

 =Pullman, Wash.=
   KWSC               1220

 =Raleigh, N. C.=
   WFTF                680

 =Reading, Pa.=
   WEEU                830

 =Reynosa, Tamaulipas=
   XEAW                956

 =Richmond, Va.=
   WRVA               1110

 =Rochester, N. Y.=
   WHAM               1150

 =Salt Lake City, Utah=
   KDYL               1290
   KSL                1130

 =San Antonio, Tex.=
   KTSA               1290
   WOAI               1190

 =San Diego, Cal.=
   KFSD                600
   KGB                1330

 =San Francisco, Cal.=
   KFRC                610
   KGO                 790
   KPO                 680
   KTAB                560
   KYA                1230

 =San Juan, Puerto Rico=
   WKAQ               1240

 =Schenectady, N. Y.=
   WGY                 790

 =Seattle, Wash.=
   KJR                 970
   KOL                1270
   KOMO                920
   KTW                1220

 =Shreveport, La.=
   KTBS               1450
   KWKH                850

 =Sioux City, Iowa=
   KSCJ               1330

 =Sioux Falls, S. D.=
   KSOO               1110

 =Spokane, Wash.=
   KFPY               1340
   KGA                1470
   KHQ                 590

 =Stevens Point, Wis.=
   WLBL                900

 =St. Joseph, Mo.=
   KFEQ                680

 =St. Louis, Mo.=
   KMOX               1090
   KWK                1350
   WEW                 760

 =St. Paul, Minn.=
   KSTP               1460

 =Strathmore (Calgary), Alta.=
   CFCN               1030

 =Superior, Wis.=
   WEBC               1290

 =Syracuse, N. Y.=
   WFBL               1360

 =Tallmadge, Ohio=
   WADC               1320

 =Tampa, Fla.=
   WDAE               1220

 =Toledo, Ohio=
   WSPD               1340

 =Topeka, Kans.=
   WIBW                580

 =Toronto, Ont.=
   CRCT                960

 =Tulsa, Okla.=
   KVOO               1140

 =Twp. of Kingston (Toronto), Ont.=
   CFRB                690

 =Villa Acuna, Coahuila=
   XER                 735

 =Wheeling, W. Va.=
   WWVA               1160

 =Wichita, Kans.=
   KFH                1300

 =Windsor, Ont.=
   CKLW                840

 =Winnipeg, Man.=
   CKY                 910

 =Yankton, S. D.=
   WNAX                570

 =York, Pa.=
   WORK               1000

 =Zion, Ill.=
   WCBD               1080


[A] Stations listed include only those of 1000 watts power (or
higher).

NOTE: Numbers following call letters indicate approximate dial setting.




WARRANTY

(_This Warranty not applicable outside U.S.A._)

Your Delco Radio Carries the Same Guarantee As Your Car


"The manufacturer warrants each new radio receiving set manufactured by
it to be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use
and service, its obligation under this warranty being limited to making
good at its factory or designated Branches any part or parts thereof
which shall within ninety (90) days or 4,000 miles whichever expires
first, after installation of such auto radio receiving set for the
original purchaser, be returned to it with transportation charges
prepaid and which its examination shall disclose to its satisfaction to
have been thus defective; this warranty being expressly in lieu of all
other warranties expressed or implied and of all other obligations or
liabilities on its part, and the manufacturer neither assumes nor
authorizes any other person to assume for it any other liability in
connection with the sale of its products."

"This warranty shall not apply to any radio receiving set which shall
have been repaired or altered outside manufacturer's authorized Service
Stations in any way so as in the judgment of the manufacturer to affect
its stability, or on parts not made or authorized by the manufacturer
have been used for replacement or other purposes, nor which has been
subject to misuse, negligence, or accident."


 UNITED MOTORS SERVICE, INC.

 DETROIT, MICH.


 Form No. 2095                          Printed in U. S. A.




===========================================================================
===========================================================================




 Delco


 Rebuilt                                            1 55-D
 Delcotron Generator                               1845985


 Rebuilt by Delco-Remy. Division of General Motors, Anderson, Indiana,
 46011
 Made in U.S.A.              275829                  Printed in U.S.A.




12-17-71                        DR-7086


INSTALLING SERVICE DELCOTRON® GENERATOR

1. DISCONNECT GROUNDED CABLE FROM BATTERY.

2. If it is necessary to rotate the slip ring end frame to match the
unit being replaced, remove the thru bolts, separate frames just far
enough to rotate to desired position and replace thru bolts.

CAUTION: Separating the end frame too far causes the brushes to drop on
to the greased shaft. If this happens, remove end frame completely,
clean brushes with clean cloth, reassemble springs and brushes retaining
them in position with a pin (toothpick). Remove pin after frames are
reassembled.


WHEN INSTALLING DELCOTRON® GENERATOR WITH INTEGRAL REGULATOR, THE SLIP
RING END FRAME MOUNTING BRACKET IS NOT NEEDED.

3. When reusing the original fan, pulley and collar, tighten shaft nut
to 40 to 60 lb. ft. If torque wrench is not available, insert a 5/16"
hex wrench in end of shaft and tighten nut until the spring washer is
just flattened.

4. Install Delcotron® Generator and check belt tension, mounting bolt
tightness and make sure all electrical connections are clean and secure.

IMPORTANT: Never operate the Delcotron® Generator without being
connected to the battery. Never attempt to polarize the Delcotron®
Generator.


DELCO-REMY Division of General Motors Anderson, Indiana              BPI





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Delco Manuals: Radio Model 633,
Delcotron Generator, by Delco-Remy Division

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DELCO MANUALS ***

***** This file should be named 31407-8.txt or 31407-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/4/0/31407/

Produced by Gerard Arthus, Meredith Bach, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
